README.md, before:

# Subregular Language Library for Machine Learning

This repository provides a variety of regular languages of varying types in order to provide a benchmark for Machine Learning models and to help better understand the kind of sequential patterns neural networks in particular are able to learn successfuly and under what conditions. Some motivation is provided in [Avcu et al. (2017) paper "Subregular Complexity and Deep Learning"](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjggda6gaTuAhVRElkFHcpJD4kQFjACegQIBhAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fprojects.illc.uva.nl%2FLaCo%2Fclclab%2Fmedia%2Fpdfs%2F2017%2Fvelhoen2017.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3YNi86XUzp5U_I1sKb6u_I).
The regular languages themselves are based on the Subregular Hierarchies of languages (see [Rogers and Pullum 2011](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10849-011-9140-2) and [Rogers et al. 2013](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-642-39998-5_6)).

## Dependencies

-   Python >= 3.6
-   Tensorflow >= 2.4.0
-   Pynini == 2.1.2

## Usage
1. [Prerequisite setup](#prerequisite-setup)
2. [Data generation](#data-generation)
3. [Neural models](#neural-models)
4. [Collecting evaluations](#collecting-evaluations)
5. [Adding new languages](#adding-new-languages)

### Prerequisite setup
The workflow of this codebase was tested on Linux systems using Conda, available through the Anaconda toolkit [here](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual). Miniconda will also work. The entirety of the workflow should be carried out in a Conda environment (explained below).  

First, install Conda. Next, download this repository with the green 'Code' button or via `git`:

```cmd
git clone https://github.com/Dechrissen/subregular-learning.git
```
Create a new environment <environment_name> (call it `subreg`, for example) like below, and activate the environment. The environment can be closed when you're finished with `conda deactivate`.
```cmd
conda create -n <environment_name>
conda activate <environment_name>
```

`cd` to the root of this project's directory, and install the dependencies in your Conda environment:

```cmd
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Finally, install `pynini` via `conda-forge` (only version 2.1.2 has been tested with this workflow) in your Conda environment:
```cmd
conda install -c conda-forge pynini=2.1.2
```

### Data generation
Data for each language (sets of strings) is generated according to FSAs (in the form of `.fst` files) of given subregular languages. The process of data generation is outlined in the below 3 steps:

#### 1 - `.att` files
Provide a file encoding the possible transitions in a given subregular language in the form of an `.att` file (example below). One file per language should be placed in the `/src/fstlib/att_format` directory.
```
0	0	b	b
0	0	c	c
0	0	d	d
0	1	a	a
1	0	b	b
1	0	c	c
1	0	d	d
0
1
```
The `.att` files can be written by hand, but this is time-consuming and error-prone. We recommend writing automata with software such as [openfst](http://www.openfst.org/twiki/bin/view/FST/WebHome) currently maintained by researchers at Google, or `plebby`, which is included in [The Language Toolkit](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2) by Dakotah Lambert. We have used `plebby` for specifying the acceptors and `openfst` for data generation through its Python wrapper [Pynini](http://www.openfst.org/twiki/bin/view/GRM/Pynini). (See [Adding new languages](#adding-new-languages))

#### 2 - `att2fst.sh` script

This script has 3 dependencies: (1) `.att` files, (2) `ins.txt` (input symbols) and (3) `outs.txt` (output symbols), all of which should go in `/src/fstlib/att_format`. The `ins.txt` and `outs.txt` files currently in the repo are set up for a max of 64 universe symbols and their UTF-8 encodings. Should you want to support more than 64 symbols, you should modify the script `/src/fstlib/att_format/make-ins-and-outs.py`and run it.

Once all the desired languages (as `.att` files) and `ins.txt` & `outs.txt` are in `/src/fstlib/att_format`, run the `att2fst.sh` script from the `fstlib` directory:

```cmd
./att2fst.sh
```

This will create corresponding `.fst` files (which are output to `/src/fstlib/fst_format/`). These are binary files which can be processed by `openfst` and are what `pynini` uses to generate strings in a given language.

#### 3 - `data-gen.py` script

After the `.fst` files are compiled, run `data-gen.py` which is in `/src`:

```cmd
python /src/data-gen.py
```

This will generate Training, Dev, Test 1, Test 2, and Test 3 sets for the languages listed in `/tags.txt` and store them in `/data_gen`.

Check whether the data was generated successfully using `check.py`. If any of the files are missing strings, a "missing" or "incomplete" message will be printed to the terminal.  

In `/data_gen`, there are three subsets generated: `1k`, `10k`, and `100k`. Each one contains `_Training.txt`, `_Dev.txt`, `_Test1.txt`, `_Test2.txt`, and `_Test3.txt` for each language.

#### About the training, dev, and test data

- **Training** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19.
- **Dev** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19 which are disjoint from Training.
- **Test 1** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19 which are disjoint from both Training and Dev.
- **Test 2** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 31 and 50.
- **Test 3** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 31 and 50; in particular, each positive string *x* is paired with a negative string *y* such that the string edit distance of *(x,y)* is 1.

Equal numbers of strings of each length in the selected length range are chosen. Under these constraints, the strings themselves are randomly selected uniformly.

#### `check.py` script

The script `check.py` in `/src` will check the `data_gen` directory for the generated data. For each file size subset (1k, 10k, 100k) the 5 datasets for each language will be checked to determine if they exist/have sufficient strings. For each dataset, `missing` will be output if it doesn't exist, or `incomplete` will be output if the dataset hasn't achieved its designated file size (along with the amount it stopped at).

### Neural models
The currently supported RNN types are s-RNN, GRU and LSTM.  

#### Training
To train a single model, run `main.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow`. Most of its arguments are self-expanatory, but note that the `--bidi` flag denotes whether the model's RNN is bidirectional. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/main.py --batch-size 64 --epochs 30 --embed-dim 100 --rnn-type gru --dropout 0 --bidi False --train-data "/src/data_gen/data/100k/SL.4.2.0_Training.txt" --val-data "/src/data_gen/data/100k/SL.4.2.0_Dev.txt" --output-dir "/src/models"
```

Possible arguments for `main.py` are below (along with indications of whether they are required):

- `'--train-data', type=str, required=True`
- `'--val-data', type=str, required=True`
- `'--output-dir', type=str, required=True`
- `'--batch-size', type=int, default=64`
- `'--epochs', type=int, default=10`
- `'--embed-dim', type=int, default=100`
- `'--dropout', type=float, default=0.2`
- `'--rnn-type', type=str, default="simple"` (valid values: "simple", "gru" or "lstm")
- `'--bidi', type=bool, default=False`

#### Testing
To produce a set of predictions from a data file (test set) and a trained model, run `predict.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow/` with the model directory and test set file as arguments. This will output the model's predictions to a file consisting of the name of the test data file + `_pred.txt` in the model's directory. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/predict.py --model-dir "models/Bi_lstm_NoDrop_SL.4.2.1_100k" --data-file "data_gen/10k/SL.4.2.0_Test1.txt"
```

To evaluate a model's predictions, run the script `eval.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow`. This program takes a prediction file as produced by `predict.py` and writes to an equivalently-named `_eval.txt` file also in the model's directory. This file reports a number of statistics regarding the model's predictions. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/eval.py --predict-file "models/BiGRU_NoDrop_SL.4.2.1_100k/Test1_pred.txt"
```

#### Batch-training script
The script `batch_train.sh` will train multiple models according to the parameters at the top of the file under the heading 'PARAMETERS TO EDIT' (shown below). This script depends on the languages listed in `/tags.txt` (one language per line) which must also have a corresponding `.fst` file in `/src/fstlib/lib_fst`.
```{bash}
UNIVERSAL_ARGS=( --batch-size 64 --epochs 30 --embed-dim 100 )
rnn_type="simple" # simple / gru / lstm
```
These default values can be tweaked as needed. The `UNIVERSAL_ARGS` list can be edited to vary the batch size, epochs, and embedding layers. The `rnn_type` value can be changed to any of the 3 supported neural network types. With the configuration above, the script will train s-RNN models for all the languages listed in `/tags.txt`, one for each data size.  

For each model, the script will also run `predict.py` for each test set to generate three `_pred.txt` files. Then, it will run `eval.py` on each prediction file. These files are all generated in the corresponding model's directory.

### Collecting evaluations

After models have been trained and evaluated (i.e. `_eval.txt` files exist in `/models`), run the script `collect_evals.sh`. This will collect all of the `_eval.txt` files present in `/models/` and output their evaluation metrics (currently F score and accuracy) into `/all_evals.txt`.  

To organize these results nicely into a `.csv` file, run `/evals2csv.py`. This will generate a file `/all_evals.csv`.

### Adding new languages

`/src/subreglib` contains `.plebby` files which can be used with `plebby` which is included in [The Language Toolkit](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2) by Dakotah Lambert. Each file specifies the acceptors for various languages and, after being run via `plebby`, outputs `.att` files for each language. A usage guide for `plebby` is [here](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2/blob/master/docs/plebbyGuide.txt).

## Acknowledgements

This repository is the latest installment of work by several
individuals since 2017 and is a continuation of the work reported by
[Avcu et
al. (2017)](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjggda6gaTuAhVRElkFHcpJD4kQFjACegQIBhAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fprojects.illc.uva.nl%2FLaCo%2Fclclab%2Fmedia%2Fpdfs%2F2017%2Fvelhoen2017.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3YNi86XUzp5U_I1sKb6u_I).
with Heinz, Fodor, and Shibata overseeing its development. Apart from
Shibata, the researchers are based at Stony Brook University.

- [Derek Andersen (CompLing MA 2021)](https://github.com/Dechrissen)
- [Joanne Chau (CompLing MA 2020)](https://github.com/joannechau)
- Paul Fodor (Professor of Instruction, CS)
- Tiantian Gao (CS, PhD 2019)
- [Jeffrey Heinz (Professor, Linguistics & IACS)](http://jeffreyheinz.net/)
- [Kalina Kostyzyn (Ling, current PhD)](https://github.com/kkostyszyn)
- [Emily Peterson (Ling, CompLing MA 2020)](https://github.com/emkp)
- Chihiro Shibata (Professor, Tokyo University of Technology CS)
- [Cody St. Clair (Ling MA 2020)](https://github.com/cody-stclair)
- Rahul Verma (CS, MS 2018)

Most recently, this repository is a continuation by Derek Andersen of the work done by Peterson, St. Clair, and Chau [here](https://github.com/emkp/CSE538_FinalProject). A summary of the results from their work is in `/docs/2020_report.pdf`. They themselves forked [Kostyzyn's repo](https://github.com/kkostyszyn/SBFST_2019). Kostyzyn inherited the code from Gao, and Verma originated the code base for the project.

Commit message:

add ins/out files to /subreglib

README.md, after:

# Subregular Language Library for Machine Learning

This repository provides a variety of regular languages of varying types in order to provide a benchmark for Machine Learning models and to help better understand the kind of sequential patterns neural networks in particular are able to learn successfuly and under what conditions. Some motivation is provided in [Avcu et al. (2017) paper "Subregular Complexity and Deep Learning"](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjggda6gaTuAhVRElkFHcpJD4kQFjACegQIBhAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fprojects.illc.uva.nl%2FLaCo%2Fclclab%2Fmedia%2Fpdfs%2F2017%2Fvelhoen2017.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3YNi86XUzp5U_I1sKb6u_I).
The regular languages themselves are based on the Subregular Hierarchies of languages (see [Rogers and Pullum 2011](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10849-011-9140-2) and [Rogers et al. 2013](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-642-39998-5_6)).

## Dependencies

-   Python >= 3.6
-   Tensorflow >= 2.4.0
-   Pynini == 2.1.2

## Usage
1. [Prerequisite setup](#prerequisite-setup)
2. [Data generation](#data-generation)
3. [Neural models](#neural-models)
4. [Collecting evaluations](#collecting-evaluations)
5. [Adding new languages](#adding-new-languages)

### Prerequisite setup
The workflow of this codebase was tested on Linux systems using Conda, available through the Anaconda toolkit [here](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual). Miniconda will also work. The entirety of the workflow should be carried out in a Conda environment (explained below).  

First, install Conda. Next, download this repository with the green 'Code' button or via `git`:

```cmd
git clone https://github.com/Dechrissen/subregular-learning.git
```
Create a new environment <environment_name> (call it `subreg`, for example) like below, and activate the environment. The environment can be closed when you're finished with `conda deactivate`.
```cmd
conda create -n <environment_name>
conda activate <environment_name>
```

`cd` to the root of this project's directory, and install the dependencies in your Conda environment:

```cmd
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Finally, install `pynini` via `conda-forge` (only version 2.1.2 has been tested with this workflow) in your Conda environment:
```cmd
conda install -c conda-forge pynini=2.1.2
```

### Data generation
Data for each language (sets of strings) is generated according to FSAs (in the form of `.fst` files) of given subregular languages. The process of data generation is outlined in the below 3 steps:

#### 1 - `.att` files
Provide a file encoding the possible transitions in a given subregular language in the form of an `.att` file (example below). One file per language should be placed in the `/src/fstlib/att_format` directory.
```
0	0	b	b
0	0	c	c
0	0	d	d
0	1	a	a
1	0	b	b
1	0	c	c
1	0	d	d
0
1
```
The `.att` files can be written by hand, but this is time-consuming and error-prone. We recommend writing automata with software such as [openfst](http://www.openfst.org/twiki/bin/view/FST/WebHome) currently maintained by researchers at Google, or `plebby`, which is included in [The Language Toolkit](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2) by Dakotah Lambert. We have used `plebby` for specifying the acceptors and `openfst` for data generation through its Python wrapper [Pynini](http://www.openfst.org/twiki/bin/view/GRM/Pynini). (See [Adding new languages](#adding-new-languages))

#### 2 - `att2fst.sh` script

This script has 3 dependencies: (1) `.att` files, (2) `ins.txt` (input symbols) and (3) `outs.txt` (output symbols), all of which should go in `/src/fstlib/att_format`. The `ins.txt` and `outs.txt` files currently in the repo are set up for a max of 64 universe symbols and their UTF-8 encodings. Should you want to support more than 64 symbols, you should modify the script `/src/fstlib/att_format/make-ins-and-outs.py`and run it (the `ins.txt` and `outs.txt` generated should also be copied into `/src/subreglib`).

Once all the desired languages (as `.att` files) and `ins.txt` & `outs.txt` are in `/src/fstlib/att_format`, run the `att2fst.sh` script from the `fstlib` directory:

```cmd
./att2fst.sh
```

This will create corresponding `.fst` files (which are output to `/src/fstlib/fst_format/`). These are binary files which can be processed by `openfst` and are what `pynini` uses to generate strings in a given language.

#### 3 - `data-gen.py` script

After the `.fst` files are compiled, run `data-gen.py` which is in `/src`:

```cmd
python /src/data-gen.py
```

This will generate Training, Dev, Test 1, Test 2, and Test 3 sets for the languages listed in `/tags.txt` and store them in `/data_gen`.

Check whether the data was generated successfully using `check.py`. If any of the files are missing strings, a "missing" or "incomplete" message will be printed to the terminal.  

In `/data_gen`, there are three subsets generated: `1k`, `10k`, and `100k`. Each one contains `_Training.txt`, `_Dev.txt`, `_Test1.txt`, `_Test2.txt`, and `_Test3.txt` for each language.

#### About the training, dev, and test data

- **Training** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19.
- **Dev** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19 which are disjoint from Training.
- **Test 1** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 10 and 19 which are disjoint from both Training and Dev.
- **Test 2** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 31 and 50.
- **Test 3** data contains equal numbers of positive and negative strings between the lengths of 31 and 50; in particular, each positive string *x* is paired with a negative string *y* such that the string edit distance of *(x,y)* is 1.

Equal numbers of strings of each length in the selected length range are chosen. Under these constraints, the strings themselves are randomly selected uniformly.

#### `check.py` script

The script `check.py` in `/src` will check the `data_gen` directory for the generated data. For each file size subset (1k, 10k, 100k) the 5 datasets for each language will be checked to determine if they exist/have sufficient strings. For each dataset, `missing` will be output if it doesn't exist, or `incomplete` will be output if the dataset hasn't achieved its designated file size (along with the amount it stopped at).

### Neural models
The currently supported RNN types are s-RNN, GRU and LSTM.  

#### Training
To train a single model, run `main.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow`. Most of its arguments are self-expanatory, but note that the `--bidi` flag denotes whether the model's RNN is bidirectional. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/main.py --batch-size 64 --epochs 30 --embed-dim 100 --rnn-type gru --dropout 0 --bidi False --train-data "/src/data_gen/data/100k/SL.4.2.0_Training.txt" --val-data "/src/data_gen/data/100k/SL.4.2.0_Dev.txt" --output-dir "/src/models"
```

Possible arguments for `main.py` are below (along with indications of whether they are required):

- `'--train-data', type=str, required=True`
- `'--val-data', type=str, required=True`
- `'--output-dir', type=str, required=True`
- `'--batch-size', type=int, default=64`
- `'--epochs', type=int, default=10`
- `'--embed-dim', type=int, default=100`
- `'--dropout', type=float, default=0.2`
- `'--rnn-type', type=str, default="simple"` (valid values: "simple", "gru" or "lstm")
- `'--bidi', type=bool, default=False`

#### Testing
To produce a set of predictions from a data file (test set) and a trained model, run `predict.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow/` with the model directory and test set file as arguments. This will output the model's predictions to a file consisting of the name of the test data file + `_pred.txt` in the model's directory. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/predict.py --model-dir "models/Bi_lstm_NoDrop_SL.4.2.1_100k" --data-file "data_gen/10k/SL.4.2.0_Test1.txt"
```

To evaluate a model's predictions, run the script `eval.py` in `/src/neural_net/tensorflow`. This program takes a prediction file as produced by `predict.py` and writes to an equivalently-named `_eval.txt` file also in the model's directory. This file reports a number of statistics regarding the model's predictions. Example:

```cmd
python src/neural_net/tensorflow/eval.py --predict-file "models/BiGRU_NoDrop_SL.4.2.1_100k/Test1_pred.txt"
```

#### Batch-training script
The script `batch_train.sh` will train multiple models according to the parameters at the top of the file under the heading 'PARAMETERS TO EDIT' (shown below). This script depends on the languages listed in `/tags.txt` (one language per line) which must also have a corresponding `.fst` file in `/src/fstlib/lib_fst`.
```{bash}
UNIVERSAL_ARGS=( --batch-size 64 --epochs 30 --embed-dim 100 )
rnn_type="simple" # simple / gru / lstm
```
These default values can be tweaked as needed. The `UNIVERSAL_ARGS` list can be edited to vary the batch size, epochs, and embedding layers. The `rnn_type` value can be changed to any of the 3 supported neural network types. With the configuration above, the script will train s-RNN models for all the languages listed in `/tags.txt`, one for each data size.  

For each model, the script will also run `predict.py` for each test set to generate three `_pred.txt` files. Then, it will run `eval.py` on each prediction file. These files are all generated in the corresponding model's directory.

### Collecting evaluations

After models have been trained and evaluated (i.e. `_eval.txt` files exist in `/models`), run the script `collect_evals.sh`. This will collect all of the `_eval.txt` files present in `/models/` and output their evaluation metrics (currently F score and accuracy) into `/all_evals.txt`.  

To organize these results nicely into a `.csv` file, run `/evals2csv.py`. This will generate a file `/all_evals.csv`.

### Adding new languages

`/src/subreglib` contains `.plebby` files which can be used with `plebby` which is included in [The Language Toolkit](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2) by Dakotah Lambert. Each file specifies the acceptors for various languages and, after being run via `plebby`, outputs `.att` files for each language. A usage guide for `plebby` is [here](https://github.com/vvulpes0/Language-Toolkit-2/blob/master/docs/plebbyGuide.txt).

## Acknowledgements

This repository is the latest installment of work by several
individuals since 2017 and is a continuation of the work reported by
[Avcu et
al. (2017)](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjggda6gaTuAhVRElkFHcpJD4kQFjACegQIBhAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fprojects.illc.uva.nl%2FLaCo%2Fclclab%2Fmedia%2Fpdfs%2F2017%2Fvelhoen2017.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3YNi86XUzp5U_I1sKb6u_I).
with Heinz, Fodor, and Shibata overseeing its development. Apart from
Shibata, the researchers are based at Stony Brook University.

- [Derek Andersen (CompLing MA 2021)](https://github.com/Dechrissen)
- [Joanne Chau (CompLing MA 2020)](https://github.com/joannechau)
- Paul Fodor (Professor of Instruction, CS)
- Tiantian Gao (CS, PhD 2019)
- [Jeffrey Heinz (Professor, Linguistics & IACS)](http://jeffreyheinz.net/)
- [Kalina Kostyzyn (Ling, current PhD)](https://github.com/kkostyszyn)
- [Emily Peterson (Ling, CompLing MA 2020)](https://github.com/emkp)
- Chihiro Shibata (Professor, Tokyo University of Technology CS)
- [Cody St. Clair (Ling MA 2020)](https://github.com/cody-stclair)
- Rahul Verma (CS, MS 2018)

Most recently, this repository is a continuation by Derek Andersen of the work done by Peterson, St. Clair, and Chau [here](https://github.com/emkp/CSE538_FinalProject). A summary of the results from their work is in `/docs/2020_report.pdf`. They themselves forked [Kostyzyn's repo](https://github.com/kkostyszyn/SBFST_2019). Kostyzyn inherited the code from Gao, and Verma originated the code base for the project.
